Updated 42N44 (#506)
neo4j/docs-status-codes: modules/ROOT/pages/errors/gql-errors/42N44.adoc

= 42N44

== Status description
error: syntax error or access rule violation - inaccessible variable. It is not possible to access the variable `{ <<variable>> }` declared before the `{ <<clause>> }` clause when using { <<groupingConstructs>> }.

== Explanation

> A `WITH` or `RETURN` clause that uses `DISTINCT`, an aggregation, or a `GROUP BY` clause defines a new set of available variables: the grouping keys, projection item aliases and the aggregation results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `WITH` or `RETURN` clause that uses `DISTINCT`, an aggregation, or a `GROUP BY` clause defines a new set of available variables: grouping keys, projection item aliases, and aggregation results.
```

> Any of its subclauses (`ORDER BY`, `WHERE`) can therefore only reference those grouping keys, projection item aliases, and aggregation results, not the variables that were in scope before the clause.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any of its subclauses (`ORDER BY`, `WHERE`) can therefore only reference those grouping keys, projection item aliases, and aggregation results, not the variables that are in scope before the clause.
```

> Referencing a variable that was declared before such a clause, and that is neither a grouping key, projection item alias nor an aggregation result, is not possible and results in this error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Referencing a variable that is declared before such a clause, and that is not a grouping key, projection item alias, or an aggregation result, is not possible and results in this error.
```

== Example scenario

> For example, the following query groups by `a` and aggregates with `count(*)`, but then tries to sort on `b`, which is neither a grouping key, projection item, nor an aggregation result:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Try grouping by `a` and aggregating with `count(*)`, but then sorting on `b`, which is not a grouping key, projection item, or an aggregation result:
```

[source,cypher]
----
UNWIND [{a: 1, b: 10}, {a: 1, b: 20}, {a: 2, b: 30}] AS row
WITH row.a AS a, row.b AS b
RETURN a, count(*) AS cnt
  GROUP BY a

>   ORDER BY b

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ORDER BY b;
```

----

> Because `b` was declared before the `RETURN` clause and is not part of the grouping, it cannot be accessed in the `ORDER BY` subclause.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because `b` is declared before the `RETURN` clause and is not part of the grouping, it cannot be accessed by the `ORDER BY` subclause.
```

> You will receive an error with GQLSTATUS 42N44 and status description:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The query returns an error with GQLSTATUS 42N44 and status description:
```

> [source]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.GQLSTATUS error
[source, error]
```

----

> error: syntax error or access rule violation - inaccessible variable. It is not possible to access the variable `b` declared before the RETURN clause when using `DISTINCT`, an aggregation, or a `GROUP BY` clause.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
42N44: syntax error or access rule violation - inaccessible variable. It is not possible to access the variable `b` declared before the RETURN clause when using `DISTINCT`, an aggregation, or a `GROUP BY` clause.
```
